Petro Werth, Financial Manager at VGHS. All staff and learners will be required to wear a mask all the time when school re-opens on Monday. Photo supplied It’s difficult to imagine what a school day will look like under Covid-19. Victoria Girls’ High School kindly shared their re-opening plan and protocols. This is an edited version. Holidays have been significantly shortened and Grade 8 to 11 curricula have been slightly cut to be able to fit in with the revised time available. Matric learners may attend school in full school uniform, full sports uniform or civvies for the first few weeks, after which a decision will be made about other grades.  Clean, comfortable and warm clothing is what matters, says the school. The school timetable will continue as per normal with two streams for each grade alternating on-site teaching days. This means every learner may only come to school on alternate days (i.e. Green stream comes to school on Day 1, 3, 5, etc. and the Blue stream on Day 2, 4, 6, etc. – with streams changing after every cycle).  Remote teaching will continue as well in order to accommodate families affected by COVID-19, sick learners or boarders unable to return. A perspex screen has been mounted at the reception desk. Grades will be assigned a specific corridor and ablution facilities to limit contact between grades.  In addition, movement will be limited to teachers changing classes and senior grades moving between their four classes per lesson. Learners will be required to disinfect regularly. Desks will be disinfected after each lesson if learners move and classes will be cleaned daily. Because there will be no co-curriculars, school will end at either 1pm or 1.45pm which will provide time for cleaners to clean classrooms. No bags will be allowed to be brought into classrooms (only books). There will be no Tuckshop at school.  In addition, all events are (e.g.  camps, dances, tours, competitions, etc.) are cancelled until further notice. The school’s psychologist will be available to support learners. No parent is being forced to send their child to school.  Teachers will continue with a remote teaching option to enable learners to work from home. What does a day look like? When staff and learners arrive After daily screening at entrance Lesson Time Break times End of the school day Learners will queue along this pavement at the start of each school day, to be screened at the single entrance everyone will be required to use. LO Gym and Computer Literacy Lessons Assembly and WEP Office Area and Admin Area 