Dear Residents Makana Municipality launched four water and sewer related infrastructure projects. These are: a) Upgrade of Mayfield Outfall Sewer b) Belmont Valley WWTW Repair Works c)  Refurbishment of Jamieson and Milner Dams d) Asbestos pipe replacement Below are the time frames and costs of the projects.        UPGRADE OF MAYFIELD OUTFALL SEWER This project entails setting out of the works, construction of sewer manholes, excavation of sewer trenches, installation and testing of sewer pipes, linking the duplicated sewer line to the existing sewer line and tidying up the site after construction works are complete. BELMONT VALLEY The first phase of this project entails the erection of a 2.1m high razor mesh security fence. It also includes the installation of access gate to be a double leafed swing type lockable gate 3.6m wide. Contractors will install and commission a low voltage non-lethal electrical fence with a data logger system linked to the SCADA system. The second phase includes the refurbishment of the plant. REFURBISHMENT OF THE JAMIESON AND MILNER DAMS This project entails the removal of plant growth and roots on dam embankments, filling up of animal burrows on the embankment, removal and treatment of termite nests, repairs to spillways, replace outlet valves, attend to leaks if present, removing access to the intake towers at both dams, filling up settlement on the embankment crest and other parts of the embankments, attending to erosion on the return channels and installation of telemetry and link to existing SCADA. ASBESTOS PIPE REPLACEMENT Approximately 4.2km of asbestos pipes have been identified for upgrading. It is proposed that the existing pipes be replaced with uPVC pipes of various classes and similar diameters. The replacement of the pipes will assist in alleviating water losses, wasted maintenance costs, distressed experienced by the general public and businesses and also negating possible negative environmental impacts due to the ongoing maintenance required to fix the pipes. The asbestos pipes will be replaced on the following streets: In addition to the projects listed above, the Department of Human Settlements has approved the budget for the construction of 178 housing units in the following areas: N Street                                  –          31 Units
Upper Mndandi                    –           15 Units
Xolani                                    –           35 Units
Lower Mnandi                       –           42 Units
Lingelihle Extension             –           25 Units
Rhini ERF 4103                   –           30 Units Lastly, I would like to convey my congratulations to Councillor Ramie Xonxa for winning an award in recognition of his work in promoting indigenous knowledge systems. Cllr Xonxa was handed the award by MEC of Sport, Recreation, Arts and Culture honourable Fezeka Bayeni during the Arts and Culture Awards held at the East London ICC on 21 February 2020. Cllr Xonxa was one of three finalists in the Indigenous Knowledge Systems category. Honourable Executive Mayor Councillor Mzukisi Mpahlwa