Students urged to self-quarantine in residence for 14 days Specialist training for staff, strict protocols including daily screening, physical distancing, hand hygiene and mask-wearing, are in place as Rhodes University this week welcomes back on campus the first cohort of students who have been identified in line with the criteria set out by the Department of Higher Education & Training (DHET). These include senior science and pharmacy students, students with disabilities and students whose home environment is not conducive to quality learning. In a statement, the University said that training for relevant staff members had included the application of basic microbiological cleaning principles targeting SARS-CoV-2. This method was guided by the Global Bio Risk Advisory Council’s (GBAC) protocol for response and remediation and the practical guidelines of the Professional Body for Environmental Hygiene in South Africa, said Luzuko Jacobs, Director: Communications & Advancement. “The University has had to balance a number of serious priorities to get to this point,” said Vice Chancellor Dr Sizwe Mabizela. “On the one hand, is the health, wellbeing and safety of students, staff and our surrounding community, and on the other, the academic programme, the futures of our students and livelihoods. In our decisions, we are guided by the three-pronged theme of the Department of Higher Education and Training – save lives, save the academic year and maximise opportunities for student success. “The Covid-19 pandemic is however still our reality,” Mabizela said. “There are a number of important voluntary individual responsibilities that each one of us will have to exercise at this difficult time to create a safe and conducive environment for teaching and learning.” To support these individual initiatives, new systems, processes and rules had been approved and communicated. The Students Disciplinary Code, Hall and Staff Codes had been reviewed. “It should, however, be emphasised that curbing the spread of the virus in our community is less about the University’s capacity or capability to enforce the stringent measures that are in place, and more about the individual responsibility and agency of each student and staff member to safeguard their own health and wellbeing and that of the other members of our community,” Mabizela said. PRACTICAL STEPS FOR STUDENTS’ RETURN SAFETY PROTOCOLS INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING: “Understanding that this new ‘normal’ can be overwhelming, frightening and isolating, the Counselling Centre has developed several plans for psychosocial support for students,” Jacobs said. “Students who, by their conduct, place the well-being of other students at risk may face exclusion from Rhodes University or from residences. Each one of us has a serious responsibility towards all those with whom we share spaces and facilities. Careless and reckless conduct will attract immediate reaction and stern consequences.” More information at https://www.ru.ac.za/cvrtt/