The coronavirus pandemic in South Africa is going to get much worse before it gets better…the duration, scale and impact of the pandemic depends on our actions as a society and on our behaviour as individuals. President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday 24 May announced the easing of lockdown restrictions to level 3 from 1 June 2020, but warned that the risk of a massive increase in infections in South Africa was now greater than ever. Among other factors, the risk of transmission in public transport would increase as 8 million people return to work. Level 3 will involve the return to operation of most sectors of the economy, subject to observance of strict health protocols and social distancing rules. There will be a phased re-opening of schools – Grades 7 and 12 learners return from 1 June; however, no parent will be forced to send their child to school if they are worried about safety. The return to work will be phased in so the workplace can be made coronavirus-ready. The lowering of the alert level to 3 was based on a risk-adjusted approach that takes into account  the level of infections and rate of transmission, the capacity of health facilities, the extent of the implementation of public health interventions and the economic and social impact of continued restrictions, the President said. Allowed under level 3 Not allowed Hotspots Coronavirus hotspots – areas where there are more than 5 infected people per every 100 000 people, or where new infections are increasing quickly – are Tshwane, Johannesburg, Ekurhuleni, Ethekwini, Nelson Mandela Bay, Buffalo City and Cape Town, as well as West Coast, Overberg and Cape Winelands district municipalities in the Western Cape, Chris Hani district in the Eastern Cape, and iLembe district in KwaZulu-Natal. “As scientists had predicted, the infections in our country have now started to rise sharply,” the President said. And we should expect that these numbers will rise even further and even faster.” Of 22,583 confirmed coronavirus cases in South Africa, 11,000 are active. 20 000 hospital beds have been, and are being, repurposed for COVID-19 cases, and 27 field hospitals are being built around the country. A shortage of diagnostic medical supplies as a result of the great demand for these supplies across the world had contributed to lengthy turnaround times for coronavirus testing, which in turn had an impact on the effectiveness of programmes, the President said.