STATEMENT BY THE MAKHANDA CIRCLE OF UNITY FOOD GROUP The Makhanda Circle of Unity Food Group has just packed the last distribution of grocery parcels to the vulnerable people of Makhanda/Grahamstown. Since 11 April, the Food Group has distributed 5 138 weekly grocery parcels and a further 2 200 boxes of groceries prepacked by donors (HCI and Corona Care). In total then the equivalent of 7 338 weekly parcels have gone out to the vulnerable people of Makhanda. A committee has been set up which is separate from The Makhanda Circle of Unity Food Group to decide on how the remaining money in the Makana Revive Covid-food account is to be spent. It was felt by some that it would not be ethical for all the money collected for food in this Makana Revive account to be channeled into one initiative. It was also felt that community kitchens were a more cost-effective option moving forward. A larger food security cluster has been formed under the umbrella of the Circle of Unity with Tim Bull as the interim head with the mandate to look into food security in Makhanda as a broader issue, and to co-ordinate the various food initiatives. More community kitchens are being established in many parts of Makhanda (24 distribution points to date) and school feeding schemes will hopefully resume next week for grades 7 and 12 at least, as well as the rollout of government grocery parcels in the near future, so the gap in food availability which we helped fill in April and May should be narrowed by these and other initiatives in June and July. The money in the CSD account which is left over and which was so generously donated by the citizens and businesses of Grahamstown/Makhanda and from many parts of South Africa and overseas, will be used to fund a cellphone food voucher scheme through Checkers which we will administer.  (Now that people can move around more easily vouchers enable people to buy food with more dignity and choice than receiving a pre-selected grocery pack). We may also use some of the money to support community kitchens, help fund Food4Futures food distribution, and the Grahamstown Feeding Association (which had to close during phases 4 and 5 of lockdown). This remaining money will therefore be put to good food provision use and will help keep our promise to you that your money would go towards making food available to the needy in our town. We would like to thank the following organisations, businesses and individuals for their invaluable help over these two months. You have been committed and supportive throughout, and we certainly could not have done the distributions without all you volunteers. Thank you. Editor’s note: details of the new food distribution committee and its activities may be found by reading the post below: City set for solidarity fast 